fix: date Picker rehaul (#1056)
appsmithorg/appsmith-docs: website/docs/reference/widgets/datepicker.md

# Date Picker

This document explains how to use a Datepicker widget to capture date and time input from users.

<VideoEmbed host="youtube" videoId="MFflGf3K324" title="Configure Datepicker Widget" caption="Configure Datepicker Widget"/>

> ## Set default date

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set date and time
```

> When working with a Datepicker widget, you may want to set a default date value to be displayed to the user before they select anything. This can be useful for providing context or a starting point for the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with the Datepicker widget, you may want to set a default date value to be displayed to the user.
```

> To set a default date, you can use the **Default Date** property. You can set this property to any valid date format that the widget supports. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set the date and time, you can use the **Default Date** property. You can set this property to any valid date format that the widget supports. 
```

### Date format

> Appsmith provides several date formats that you can choose from, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Appsmith provides several date formats that you can choose from in the **Date Format** property.
```

> * ISO 8601

Reviewer: no need to list the date formats

* LLL
* LL
* YYYY-MM-DD HH:mm
* YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss
* YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss A
* DD/MM/YYYY HH:mm
* D MMMM, YYYY
* H:mm A D MMMM, YYYY
* YYYY-MM-DD
* MM-DD-YYYY
* DD-MM-YYYY
* MM/DD/YYYY
* DD/MM/YYYY
* DD/MM/YY

> If you need more advanced date formatting options, you can use the [**Moment.js**](https://momentjs.com/docs/) library which is installed by default in Appsmith. Moment.js is a JavaScript library for parsing, validating, manipulating, and formatting dates. With Moment.js, you can define your own custom date formats using a simple syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need more advanced date formatting options, you can use the built-in [**Moment.js**](https://momentjs.com/docs/) library in Appsmith. With Moment.js, you can define your own custom date formats using JavaScript.
```

> To use Moment.js with Appsmith, you can simply write JavaScript code in the widget's **Date Format** property. For example, you can use the following code to set the default date value to **today's date** in a specific format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use Moment.js with Appsmith, you can write JavaScript code in the widget's **Date Format** property using the mustache syntax `{{}}`. For example, you can use the following code to set the default date value to **today's date** in a specific format:
```

```JS

> {{moment().format('YYYY-MM-DD')}}

Reviewer: In the Date format field I think you only need to specify the format in single quotes inside mustache syntax. Check this with the App viewers pod

```

This code uses the `moment()` function to get the current date and then formats it using the `format()` method with the desired [format string](https://momentjs.com/docs/#/parsing/string-format/).

## Display date dynamically

> You can display the date dynamically based on user interaction or by fetching the date from a query response.

Reviewer: mention that this also provided in the Default date property

---

> **Example**: suppose you want to display the date of birth of users in the [mock database](https://docs.appsmith.com/core-concepts/connecting-to-data-sources/connecting-to-databases#sample-databases).

Reviewer: write similar to the one on JSON form where we help the user understand the context better

```js
{{tblUserData.selectedRow.dob}}
```

## Access selected date

To access the date selected by the user in a Datepicker widget, you can use the `formattedDate` or `selectedDate` binding property in your widget bindings or JavaScript functions.

* The **`formattedDate`** property contains the formatted date value currently selected within the Datepicker widget. This value changes if the default value is updated or if the user inputs a new value. The format of the date depends on the `dateFormat` property that's set for the widget.
* The **`selectedDate`** property contains the ISO date string selected in the Datepicker widget. This value also changes if the default value is updated or if the user inputs a new value. The date is represented in the following format: YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.sssZ, where Z represents the time zone offset from UTC.
---
**Example**: lets take the same users example, if you want to update the date of birth, you can create a new query called `updateDob` with an SQL statement like:

```sql
UPDATE users
  SET dob = '{{DatePicker.formattedDate}}'
  WHERE id = {{tblUserData.selectedRow.id}};
```

> Then, set the `onDateSelected` property of the Datepicker widget to run the`updateDob` query. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, set the `onDateSelected` event listener of the Datepicker widget to run the`updateDob` query. 
```

> ### Retrieve data for a range

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Filter data for a date range
```

Retrieving data for a specific date involves using a query to retrieve data that falls within a specified date range.

> For example, suppose you want to allows users to filter data for specific dates, such as retrieving data of users born between `01/01/1980` and `01/01/201`. To accomplish this, you can add two date pickers to your canvas. Then, create a new query called `filterdata` with the SQL statement:

Reviewer: use the same example format

```sql
SELECT * FROM users WHERE dob > {{DatePicker1.selectedDate}} AND dob < {{DatePicker2.selectedDate}} ORDER BY id;
```

This query retrieves data based on the user-selected date range. Next, you can bind the `onDateSelected` event to run the `filterdata` query for both Datepickers.

## Set min and max date limit

To set a minimum and maximum date limit for the date pickers, you can make use of the **Min Date** and **Max Date** properties. These properties allow you to set the minimum and maximum selectable dates for the date pickers. Once you set these limits, only the dates that fall within the specified range would be displayed and selectable.

## Properties

Properties allow you to edit the widget, connect it with other widgets and customize the user actions.

### Widget properties

These properties are present in the property pane of the widget. The following table lists all the widget properties.

> |  Property   | Data type |  Description                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer: update data types

<VideoEmbed host="youtube" videoId="MFflGf3K324" title="Using the Datepicker widget" caption="Using the Datepicker widget"/>

## Set date and time
When working with the Datepicker widget, you may want to set a default date value to be displayed to the user.

To set the date and time, you can use the **Default Date** property. You can set this property to any valid date format that the widget supports. 

### Date format
Appsmith provides several date formats that you can choose from in the **Date Format** property, such as **ISO 8601**, **LLL**, and **DD/MM/YY**, among others.

If you need more advanced date formatting options, you can use the built-in [**Moment.js**](https://momentjs.com/docs/) library in Appsmith. With Moment.js, you can define your own custom date formats using JavaScript.

To use Moment.js with Appsmith, you can enter the desired format string directly into the **Date Format** property without using any curly braces or JavaScript code. 

For example, you can use `LLL` to display a date in a format such as `MMM D, YYYY h:mm A`, or `YYYY-MM` to display the year and month only.

> ### Set date in a timezone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> When working with dates and time, you may want to display them in a specific time zone. You can achieve this using Moment.js and the `moment-timezone` library. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
**Example**: suppose you want to convert the selected date and time to the IST time zone (Asia/Kolkata), you can use the following code in a query or widget binding:

```js
{{
  moment(DatePicker.selectedDate).tz("Asia/Kolkata").format()
}}
```

> This code creates a `Moment.js` object from the `DatePicker.selectedDate` property, sets the time zone to `"Asia/Kolkata"` using the `tz()` function, and formats the resulting date and time using the default format. To learn more, refer to [MomentJS timezone documentation](https://momentjs.com/timezone/docs/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Display date dynamically

Reviewer: should be after line 11 example

| **Font Color** | String| Sets the color of the text inside the widget.  |
**Font Size**   | String| Sets the size of the text inside the widget.     |
| **Emphasis Style** | String | Allows you to choose a font style; bold or italic.

## Events

These are functions that are called when event listeners are triggered in the widget. Use [actions](/reference/appsmith-framework/widget-actions) to execute tasks based on user events.

| Event              | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **onDateSelected** | Triggers an action when a user selects a date.  |
| **onFocus** | Triggers an action when a Datepicker widget is focused. |
| **onBlur** | Triggers an action when a Datepicker widget loses focus. |

> ## Sample apps

Reviewer: can we keep this above properties?
